---
title: "Decentralized Private Identity"
date: 2021-12-18
---
# Decentralized Private Identity
#### How blockchain technologies enable privacy and security in a connected world

The metaverse is coming and might be filled with annoying ads that ruin the experience. Meta knows very intimate details about its users, even if you don't have an account with them, through browsing history, friends of friends, and shopping habits. This [study](https://www.digitaltrends.com/computing/history-of-cookies-and-effect-on-privacy/) done by ICO (A U.K. Information Commissioner's Office) revealed that the average website places 34 cookies in your browser the first time you visit, 24 of which are third-party and most of which are designed to expire in the year 9999! 

The third generation of the web was coined to address this and multiple other issues that started as few centralized powers inevitably dominated the web through free to play products that sell your identity. As the saying goes, if you don't pay for a product, you are the product.

### The Problem With Free to Play

Anytime you login into a website, a session cookie starts gathering data about who you are and what you're doing. This information is run through machine learning models that put you in a box that describes your interests and then the information is sold off to advertisers. Facebook's product, [Pixel](https://www.facebook.com/business/help/742478679120153?id=1205376682832142), gives third party companies the ability to share your activity with Facebook who collects the data and provides valuable information back to the business.

Products like the Pixel do create an enormous advantage for local businesses looking to find an audience for their product and are advertised as advantageous for customers as well, but I do not want to get targeted ads for something I just discussed with friends or family. Mistrust in the companies spread and people start using ad blocks and private browsers. A measure of this mistrust can be found in the sales of smart devices for your home. People who care about privacy or security in their homes would not purchase IoT (Internet of Things) devices due to the likelihood of private conversations being listened to, by humans or machines, and stored, whether temporary or not, onto their servers. This [Twitter](https://twitter.com/cdixon/status/1467708420304216066) thread is one of many that explains the fears people have when looking to bring smart devices to their homes.

All of this is done because the websites you visit can't save your changes internally; anytime you visit a different page, all information gets lost. As a workaround, a [cookie](https://www.allaboutcookies.org/cookies/session-cookies-used-for.html) is used to create a unique identity that can store websites you are logged into, items in the shopping cart, game scores, preferences, themes, and behaviours. This enables the websites you visit to recognize you and seamlessly send you relevant information.

With the advent of the world wide web, there were obvious reasons to invent cookies. Since websites couldn't store any information, there couldn't be any social apps, e-commerce, or even web communication. The product created a lot of value very quickly, but soon after, started to be misused by advertisers; bad actors decided to track your engagement across the internet. It is uncanny how much these firms know about you, so much so that governments have decided to [regulate](https://www.cookielaw.org/the-cookie-law/) the use of cookies; every website now has a popup to notify you about their privacy policy and use of cookies.

### Web 3 Fixes This

Engaging on a website doesn't necessarily mean that it creates value for me. Often, its the opposite; people engage in content that arouses their emotional state. If you find a cute cat video, you are sure to like it and share it. If you find a hate video, you are likely to comment about why you disagree. All this engagement globalized the social networks that are Facebook, Instagram, YouTube, Pinterest, etc., but doesn't generate inherent value. These conglomerations have to sell your data to advertisers to stay in business. 

In the third generation of web applications, you don't create an account with any website. Instead, you connect to the decentralized application (dApp) with your wallet, which, upon approval, will send a unique key that identifies you. Any engagement on the website, if tracked, is used for internal data analytics and user data is [separated](https://web3.foundation/privacy-and-cookies/) from the analytics. All transactions and changes in user data require a signature from your wallet. Think of it like giving device permissions to applications that you download onto your phone. 

All transactions must be accompanied by a digital signature. Once the application knows your wallet address, all updates to user data are captured as encrypted transactions on the blockchain. A wallet signs transactions with your private key and an encrypted hash of the data is stored on the ledger, creating a disconnect between the website and the user. A private key is used to sign transactions, a public key is used to verify the signature, and an address points to your tokens on the blockchain. The only information available at your address are the tokens you own in that wallet. [Here](https://github.com/Token-Economy-Book/EnglishOriginal/wiki/Token-Security%3A-Cryptography) is a detailed explanation of how blockchain cryptography works.

To generate value, dApps engage community directly. A whole new field of [tokenomics](https://coinmarketcap.com/alexandria/article/what-is-tokenomics) has emerged that creates incentive systems using game theory and the concept of skin in the game, popularized by N.N. Taleb. The system uses stable, non-changing rules of the game so that anyone can invest in the blockchain and use data provenance as the sole source of trust. This is an exciting technology that combines privacy, security, and trust. A recipe that a traditional website cannot complete with without their free to play system. 

### Information on blockchains

Many companies that work in web3 today, use a decentralized file storage system (i.e. Arweave, IPFS). These are typically peer-to-peer file hosting services that guarantee always on file storage since the data is distributed to multiple hosts. User data can be saved as hidden non-fungible tokens on the blockchain itself. A dApp (decentralized application) combines the user data stored on the blockchain with application data in file storage services, decentralized or otherwise, to create a user experience in the app that looks and feels like a regular, centralized, website. But the advantage is that user information can be kept secret without the authentication workarounds currently in place. Look at what happened to [Ashley Madison](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ashley_Madison_data_breach) when they decided to host user information privately.

A whole set of new possibilities open up when you own your data and decide who gets to make use of it to serve you better. One could create a digital identity of themselves and share it with applications, communities, cities, governments, or countries that one would like to interact with, while keeping the information private from bad actors. A great metaverse user experience starts with a decentralized private identity. If you would like to learn how to start taking control of your data and online identity, a great place to start is this acticle by Pack McCormick called [The Great Online Game](https://www.notboring.co/p/the-great-online-game).
